+++
title = 'Applying to the Data-Driven Engineering and Sciences PhD Programme'
date = 2025-01-28
+++

We are building a new cohort-based PhD
programme that is based on a first year of high-quality training in
research and leadership. We are aiming to recruit six students. You will
be a team; you will work and learn together. We expect that you will
come from diverse backgrounds across STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics). So, when you are selected, we will work
with each of you to provide your own personalised first year of training
and research. *This will open up the opportunity to do research in any
area in which the School specialises — see [our research groups on our
website](https://www.bristol.ac.uk/science-engineering/schools/eng-maths-tech/#research).*

You each have different gaps in your knowledge and different ideas about
where you would like to specialise. On this basis, we will recommend
some existing units that you might follow. You will not be required to
do exams or coursework like the other students on these units. Instead,
we will give you small research-oriented tasks and mini-projects which
are designed to test your understanding and prepare you for PhD-level
research.

There will be some activities you do together. For example, we have the
view that you will all need a grounding in Scientific Machine Learning
(a relatively new field), and we aim to bring you together to do this,
likely in the form of a journal reading club. There are also some core
aspects of Large-Scale Data Engineering that you will need to learn,
both for your research and to prepare you for teaching tasks later on —
you will be learning these together as a group. Industrial/Applied
Science problem-solving is another core activity in our school, and
throughout this first year, you will be working together as a group with
example problems brought in from potential academic supervisors and
industrial collaborators to give you a rich interdisciplinary experience
and exposure to a range of research-related problems.

The key aims for this first year are to help you create your future PhD
project and to give you the best possible skills to take it forward. The
first year will also include individual mini projects to try out
different supervisors, broad leadership and teaching skills, and
training in how to develop research questions into work programmes.
These are key skills you need both for your own PhD and to supervise
Masters-level students. This Masters-level supervision will be a key
part of your teaching duties in this DTE programme.


The first year will conclude by us helping you develop your own PhD
research project proposal and us helping you put together a supervisor
team for it.


Our programme is 4 years in duration in total with funding provided
throughout. At the start of year 2, your PhD research project will have
been finalised, and years 2, 3, and 4 will progress similarly to a
traditional 3-year PhD, but with some added benefits — specifically,
although you will all very likely choose different areas of
specialisation, you will remain a team that can support each other and
can work together (for example, in the delivery of your teaching).

We believe this model — of a first year of training and exploration
preceding the choice of research project specialisation — is by far the
best way to do a PhD. Those of you who are familiar with the UK system
will recognise that it is broadly the CDT (centre of doctoral training)
model established by the UK funding agencies. Note that if you already
have a very specific and well-defined idea of what PhD work you would
like to do, or you have already determined which supervisor you would
like to work with, this model is not for you. We are looking
particularly for students who will spend the first year in exploration
and potentially form new research directions and ideas that we had not
previously anticipated. Also, we will be steering you to develop PhD
research projects which are strongly interdisciplinary in potentially
new and interesting ways.

## Outline terms

The annual pay will be in the range
£26-27k (net) for the 25/26 academic year, with the exact amount to be
finalised once ongoing UK-wide pay negotiations are completed. Annual
increases for subsequent years will follow standard UK research council
rates.

The funding will be associated with a
teaching requirement, and this together with the final pay rate will be
described in a contract that you will be given when you are offered a
place. The contract will oblige you to a total of 750 hours of teaching
effort over the 4-year period of the programme. Note this 750-hour
figure includes standard ratios of preparation time. We have not
finalised the distribution of hours over the 4 years — it is still
under discussion — but a possible distribution is 125-250-250-125, with
lower amounts in first year to reflect your reduced experience and extra
workload in getting up to speed with the programme, and in final year to
give you extra time to complete your PhD.

Note — it will not be possible to withdraw from your teaching
obligations without losing your entire annual funding. Similarly,
unsatisfactory performance in teaching might lead to performance
management proceedings which also could lead to the loss of your entire
annual funding.

Your university fees are covered irrespective of your "home" /
"overseas" student status. The transaction to pay them will be direct
between the School and the University and will not pass through your
bank account.

Finally, as part of the deal, you will be offered an enhanced RTSG
(research training and support grant), which we plan to be £3k per
annum. This fund will be managed in combination with your supervisors
and the programme director — and for example, might be used to buy
books, or small items of equipment, but is primarily to support your
attendance at conferences to disseminate your research — a key part we
believe of the PhD experience.

## How to apply

The final programme name is still subject to approval by the university.
As such, you will need to apply using the existing Engineering
Mathematics PhD programme in our online catalogue and we will transfer
your application to the new programme when it is fully registered.

1.  Start your application from the [Engineering Mathematics PhD
    webpage](https://www.bristol.ac.uk/study/postgraduate/research/engineering-mathematics/).
    Choose "Engineering Mathematics (PhD)" as the award type and "Apply
    for September 2025 start" as the start date.

    -   If you have already applied for a PhD in Engineering Mathematics
        as part of another studentship, choose a different start date
        and you will be able to submit a second application; we will fix
        your application start date at a later point.

2.  You will be taken to the online submission system; enter your
    details and supporting documents as requested. For the proposed PhD
    supervisors, enter "Prof David Barton and Prof Eddie Wilson" —
    note, this is because we are the co-directors of the programme, not
    because we will be your PhD research project supervisors.

3.  Notes on specific documents requested:

    -   Supervisor suitability form: download the [partially completed supervisor suitability form](/ddes-dte/assets/supervisor-suitability-form.docx); complete this form (the four
        highlighted sections only) and submit with your application. 

    -   Personal statement: highlight your motivation for applying for
        this interdisciplinary programme in particular, and any relevant
        experience and/or skills.

    -   Research proposal: submit a copy of this webpage.

    -   Research training statement: submit a blank PDF.

    -   Your referees should be academics who can comment on your
        academic ability and potential for research. **Do not put down Prof David Barton or Prof Eddie Wilson as referees.**

## Selection process

The deadline for applications is 26 February 2025. After this date we
will short list applicants based on your academic track record and
relevant experience. Your application to our programme will be
considered independently of any other PhD applications you have
submitted to the University of Bristol.

All short-listed applicants will be interviewed in March/April with
final decisions made shortly afterwards. If you are based in the UK, the
expectation is that you attend an in-person interview and associated
activities (travel expenses will be reimbursed). If you are based
overseas, alternative arrangements will be made.

We look forward to receiving your application.

David Barton & Eddie Wilson

Co-directors of the DTE in Data-Driven Engineering and Sciences
